before we get the science of dark matter
this video is sponsored by audible
because my audio book comes out in the
UK next week the Thursday the 5th of
September now I have narrated the audio
book myself which is why I partnered
with audible this week so that you can
actually listen to the book as I
intended it to be heard I absolutely
love audiobooks for that reason also I
spend about an hour of my day walking to
and from train stations as part of my
commute into work and so listening to an
audiobook actually makes that part of my
day really really fun so you could go to
audible and find my audiobook and do the
same thing or if you fancy something
more like a fiction book I just finished
listening to paced Browns red rising
saga so particularly the dark 81 that's
just come out it's so good if I had to
explain it it would be like Game of
Thrones but instead of like medieval
it's like Roman and also set in space
like a thousand years in the future when
humans have like colonized the solar
system it's amazing so you can start
listening with a free 30-day trial with
audible and your first audiobook and
your first two audible originals are
free and so to do that go to audible.com
forward slash dr. Becky or text dr.
Becky to 500 500 if you're in the u.s.
only that's audible.com /dr ve CKY for
your 30 day free trial Hey anyway back
to actual science I figured since a book
is coming out I'd give you a little
sneak peek as to what one of the
chapters is actually about and so I've
picked chapter four just because you
haven't seen it doesn't mean it doesn't
exist now I may have lifted that line
directly from the Christmas movie The
Santa Clause just please you'll have it
soon guess what doesn't exist but it's
not just relevant for father Christmas
it's also something that rings true for
dark matter something that sort of been
considered since sort of like pre
nineteen thirty but only really accepted
in
as part of our best theory of the
universe is on the end of the 1970s and
it's a concept that a lot of people
struggle with because if you can't see
it how do we know that it exists so the
first person to even conceive the idea
of dark matter was Lord Kelvin back in
1884 and what he was doing was measuring
the velocity of stars in the Milky Way
so the velocity of stars in the sort of
general neighborhood around the Sun and
he was trying to work out if they were
in like a stable system whether the
velocity of the stars and therefore the
kinetic energy they had with equal to
the amount of gravitational energy they
had if the gravity is too strong and we
knew sort of collapses in on itself and
if they've got too much kinetic energy
then the whole thing flies apart and if
you're in a bound system then the spread
of your velocity is something that we
call the velocity dispersion we use the
Greek letter Sigma to represent it is
proportional to your mass divided by
your radius and with that velocities
version he then got the amount of mass
there should be in the system in order
for it to be bound which we knew it was
because all the stars weren't flying
apart from each other and when he did
that and compared that amount with how
much you calculate is sort of trapped in
stars that's glowing and we can see is
that the two are very different there's
not enough mass in stars to explain how
much mass you have to have to stop the
whole system flying apart and you'll see
that that is a common theme going
forward in the study of dark matter is
that there's more mass there than we can
see so Lord Kelvin said there must be
dark stars that aren't shining that we
therefore can't see that must be making
up this missing matter so then in 1906
the French astronomer Kwang Clare was
then discussing kelvins work in a big
sort of a review discussion paper and he
referred to that missing matter as
Messier obstacle II which directly
translates from the French as unknown
matter for obscured matter but somehow
that kind of got lost in translation and
mixed with kelvins failure stuff where
he said they were dark stars to give us
in English what we call dark matter and
it's kind of a German simply has ever
since
it's not that it's dark is that it is
unknown and then it doesn't interact
with light at all but the term stuck it
was also in the 1920s that astronomers
realized thanks to the work of Hubble
and Shaklee and Kurtis that the Milky
Way wasn't the entire universe there was
actually galaxies outside the Milky Way
that again.what islands of hundreds of
billions of stars in their own right and
they were found clustered together and
sometimes alone in sort of the vastness
of space and so then work turned away
from the Milky Way to really studying
these individual galaxies and the
clusters they were found in so in 1930
loon mark was again measuring this
difference of the mass that we calculate
to be in a galaxy compared to the amount
of mass suggested there by light it's
only we call the mass to light ratio or
M over L and he measured this
mass-to-light ratio for five of these
new galaxies that have been found and
found that it was anywhere from a
hundred times more mass than light you
could see for a galaxy called Messier
and 81 and all the way down to six times
more mass than light you can see for
galaxy called Messier 33 and again he
concluded that the only thing this mass
could be would be extinguished stars
things like comets or meteors and clouds
of gaps that you couldn't actually see
then in 1933 Fritz Zwicky came along and
if you don't know for its wiki just go
and read about his life he was an
amazing character in astronomy and what
he did was he measured again this
velocities version but instead of stars
in the Milky Way he mention it for
galaxies in clusters so he measured the
speeds that galaxies are moving around
these clusters and he found a master
light ratio for a very famous cluster of
galaxies called the Coma Cluster of four
hundred four hundred times more mass in
the cluster than you could see in stars
now that actual estimate was off by
about eight times because our estimate
for how quickly universities expanding
was off at the time but still he
correctly concluded that there was more
dark matter than there was visible
matter in stars and again he concluded
that that non luminous matter had a made
of cold stars gases and other
small bodies like planets asteroids
comments etc then at the end of the
decade in 1939 Babcock published his PhD
thesis in which he'd measured the
rotation curve of the andromeda galaxy
now what that means is that you measure
how fast the stars are rotating around
the center of the galaxy at increasing
radius in the galaxy and then you get a
nice curve out for what is going on in
the galaxy we could do the same thing
for the solar system we could look at
how fast the planets are rotating around
the Sun and we found that the closer in
you asked for some the faster a planet
is going around and then the further
away you are from the Sun the slower
planets going around and that's because
99.9 percent of all of the maps or all
the stuff in the solar system is in the
Sun the majority of the mass is
concentrated in the center so when you
look at a galaxy you also see more stars
in the center of the galaxy than the
outskirts where it gets dimmer and so
people expected that a similar thing
would be found as what we see in the
solar system where you get a drop-off of
the rotation speed as you went further
out but Babcock in 1939 actually found
the complete opposite he found that it
was increasing with radius now again his
observations weren't the most precise at
this time but still it's gonna be very
hard to get an increasing rotation curve
rather than a decreasing rotation curve
just because your telescope isn't that
great and again what this suggested was
that there's more mass on the outskirts
of the galaxy then there is in the
center despite the fact that that's not
what you see in stars at all so research
on this obviously stalled in the 40s
because of world war two but it did mean
that by the 1950s galaxy surveys and
cluster surveys really took off because
a lot of the post-war technology was
sort of left lying around and not used
anymore everything from military radar
to radio detectors that was no longer
needed could then be used actually for
astronomy and pointed at the sky to be
used for radio observations so a lot of
that was actually done by young ought in
the Netherlands who really coordinated
that whole big effort to do that so that
by nineteen
seven Van der Hulst Raymond and Van
Borden were the first people to obtain a
rotation curve for Andromeda not in
optical light but in radio light they
were actually detecting emission in
radio wavelengths at 21 centimeters from
hydrogen gas in the Andromeda galaxy and
so the first time we were probing stuff
that we couldn't actually see in stars
and so they took this rotation curve out
much further than the optical and found
that it does rise in the center but then
flattens out towards the outskirts
giving you a flat mass-to-light ratio
and so as Ricky's unseen Matter idea
floats again but this time thinking that
it might beat you to gas then in 1958
i'm Barsoomian brought the attention
back to news galaxy clusters again
whether they were these gravitationally
bound systems and whether the kinetic
energy balance the gravitational energy
and he said there's no missing matter at
all in fact these systems are very short
list lived systems the velocities of the
galaxies means that they're gonna fly
apart in the space of about 10,000 years
or so but actually Burbidge Burbidge had
to step in 1959 and point out that if
that was the case then the galaxies
these clusters contained were younger
than the clusters themselves so how did
the galaxies even form in a cluster in
the first place if they were billions of
years older than the cluster so this led
to a lot of arguments in the 60s
particularly at a conference that was
held in Santa Barbara in California in
1961 where people got together to sort
of argue between zucchinis missing
matter and embark simians they should
just fly apart despite the fact that
they're younger than the galaxies they
contain but the conclusion from that
meeting was essentially we don't have
enough evidence to decide thankfully
there was a couple of discoveries later
in the 60s and also in the 70s they
would do just that the first of which
was that in 1963
Schmidt discovered the first quasar or
qso quasi stellar object it was
something that looked like a very very
bright star but when you got a spectrum
of that object I you split the light
through a prism
into its component wavelengths you
realize that that looks nothing like a
star at all and
actually also had a redshift of 0.158 ie
it was recessing away from us it's 16%
of the speed of light that might not
seem relevant to the problem at hand
right now but eventually it did
contribute in the 70s so bear that in
mind for later then another of these
results that's going to help in the long
run in 1974 Penzias and Wilson
accidentally discovered the Cosmic
Microwave Background this radiation
relic from the Big Bang that has been
red shifted as it traveled across the
entire universe to get to us into the
sort of microwave radio regime it was
the first direct proof that the universe
started in a Big Bang so people now
accepted the universe had a beginning
and so their thoughts then turned to
well what would the end of the universe
be and people realized it all depended
on the balance of gravity pulling all
the stuff in the universe together and
that expansion pushing outwards and so
people were very concerned with
measuring how much matter is there in
the universe as a whole
again if the expansion is stronger than
that gravitational pull then will expand
forever if it's not as strong as the
pull of gravity pulling all that mass
inwards them will eventually sort of end
up in like a Big Crunch scenario or is
it perfectly balanced again and we'll
end up with a nice equilibrium suddenly
this missing matter problem wasn't just
a curiosity for people who study
galaxies anymore it was a cosmology
problem and so there was a real focus on
measuring the mass in the universe in
the next couple of decades
in the meantime rood in 1965 was
studying this problem of galaxy clusters
again and this problem of missing matter
and he was looking at how the galaxies
move in the clusters and he determined
that that missing massive zwicky's must
be in between the galaxies themselves in
the intergalactic medium and he
concluded therefore that had to be gas
the gas that went beyond the visible
stellar light that we can see in
galaxies
except that Penzias in 1961 had already
looked
the amount of gas you can detect in
between the galaxies in the Pegasus
cluster and he found that it was only
10% of the mass that you measure must be
gravitationally there from the speed
that the galaxies are moving up that was
confirmed two years later by Meekins who
was looking at the gas this time in
x-rays you get very hot gas between
galaxies and clusters that glows in
x-ray and again he worked out how much
mass was there in this hot gas and found
that it was only 2% of the gravitational
mass of the system of cluster of
galaxies so if it was true that there
was all of this missing matter just
pervading the space between galaxies in
clusters then these results in the end
of the 60s proved that it actually
couldn't be gas alone so the 1970s was
really the decade where dark matter came
to the forefront of physics and it was
all kicked off in 1970 by Vera Rubin who
again was looking at the rotation curve
of Andromeda this time in the optical
again but using a much better instrument
that was designed by Ford and so the two
of them together published their results
in 1970 showing a very accurate rotation
curve andromeda and showing that it was
again flat suggesting a flat
mass-to-light ratio not just in gas but
also in the stars as well now they did
not give an interpretation of that flat
mass-to-light ratio they left it for the
reader is sort of an unsolved problem
it took Freeman coming along later in
the same year combining their optical
rotation curve with the radio rotation
curves that been done in the previous
decades and then also theoretical
modeling of what you see in the galaxy
he said that the amount of mass there
must be at least the amount of visible
matter we could see and that it must be
distributed very differently to how the
stars were distributed then in 1974
there was two papers that came out
within a week of each other the first
byte of striker Peebles in your Hill
then ina snow Kazakh and saw both of
which brought together these two
separate problems of them flat rotation
curves in Andromeda and other galaxies
and the missing matter in clusters and
where the clusters should be flying
apart or gravitationally bound with much
more mass there than we could actually
see and they said both of those problems
would be solved if you assume that on
average the mass-to-light ratio in
galaxies was about 10
ie 10 times as much matter there than we
could actually see these two papers
though still attributed that sort of
mass light ratio of 10 down to gas again
though despite the results of the
previous decade showing that it wasn't
gas but no one really had a better
explanation for it at the time so they
took two very different problems on very
different scales and brought them
together to solve them it makes me
wonder what unsolved problems we have
now on like vastly different scales that
could be brought together to help solve
them things like unknown knowns so
exciting now remember also the first
quasar that was discovered by Schmidt
back in the 60s well in 1979 Walsh
Carswell and Wayman discovered the twin
quasars using the telescope's at the
Georgia Bank Observatory in Manchester
New where I grew up and what they found
was that these quasars were separated by
a tiny amount on the size I mean like
six arc seconds that's six 3600 of a
degree through a tiny amount they were
also the exact same brightness and when
they took a spectra the spectra was
exactly the same shape pretty much and
also that they were at the same redshift
are the same distance away from us and
so what they were grudgingly concluded
was that actually what they were
observing was the same object but with
two images and I really how does one
object turn into two images well they
said it might be caused by a
gravitational lens if there was a galaxy
in the way of the quasar they were
seeing then what could happen is that
the gravity of that galaxy could bend
the light of the quasar and produce two
images of it that we would see that's
not a new concept
Einstein it predicted it in theory
general activity way back at the
beginning of the century and then
Eddington had used that in their clips
of 1919 to show that actually the Sun so
gravity like actually bends the light
from stars behind it and allowed us to
measure the mass of the Sun so even
though it was a tentative conclusion it
wasn't out of the realms of possibility
there that little piece of information
in mind for the next decade taking in
the seventies though in 1979 at the very
end of the decade Faber and Gallagher
produced a review article that
summarized the current view point on
this missing matter problem in clusters
and galaxies and brought everything
together to conclude that the case for
missing matter was strong and growing
stronger before that article was
published
you know everyone sort of in the
galaxies field and galaxy cluster field
was kind of believing this idea of
missing matter or dark matter but
outside of the field it was sort of
looked at with a bit of scorn or scoff
to it and only after that article was
produced summarizing everything that had
been found in the past couple decades
did people outside of that field of
astronomy and in physics start to take
the problem much more seriously so into
the 80s with people starting to take
this idea of dark matter much more
seriously
Milgram in 1983 then sort of said whoa
hold your horses
what if we've just got gravity wrong
this entire time and what if we don't
actually need all this missing matter
it's just that we don't understand our
laws of gravity he said all of the
observations could be explained if very
small accelerations that we don't really
see on earth or in the solar system but
you do see four stars in galaxies that
actually Newton's laws were F equals MA
squared instead of F equals MA and the F
equals GMM over R rather than GMM over R
squared and this was dubbed Mont or
modified Newtonian dynamics and people
in universities across the world are
still today researching various
different permutations of mond I'm not
going to go into here though why dark
matter is still the favorite theory and
why Mon sort of fell out of favor but my
book which comes out on Thursday
September 5th in the UK does go into
that if you are still interested in
hearing
or about it back to our pool quasars
though in 1985 chakra discovered what
was dubbed the Einstein cross very
similar to the twin quasars that have
been discovered last decade but now
there was four quasars that looked
identical had the same spectra shade
were at the same redshift and at the
same brightness as well and again the
only way that people thought you could
really describe that was if it was one
object with four images caused by
gravitational lensing then again two
papers in a couple of weeks of each
other came out one by su ko for Tamela
and pika and another by governer that
found lens galaxies in clusters of
galaxies these huge big blue arcs which
is a single galaxy in the background
that has been stretched out by the
galaxy cluster acting like a lens to
produce this sort of arc and suddenly
everyone is finding lenses in old new
data and everyone is all of a sudden
measuring the masses of these galaxy
clusters from the shape that the lens is
made because that suggests how much
faster has to be there to actually make
those shapes and once again they're
finding that gravity ie Einstein's
theory of general relativity suggests
those ten times more matter there than
we can actually see in stars in the
1990s more and more evidence for dark
matter came through this time it was
using that cosmic microwave background
that had been discovered accidentally by
Penzias and Wilson back in the 70s and
cosmologists has said that the way
matter clumped together in the early
universe should be imprinted on that
cosmic microwave background that relic
of the Big Bang and the Coby satellite
team in 1992 back when I was just a
teeny tiny toddler discovered this
variation in the Cosmic Microwave
Background with place on the side
something we call an isotropic and so
that reveals the areas that there was
more and less matter in the early
universe and if you look at the
differences between those fluctuations
in the Cosmic Microwave Background and
you look at the frequency of how often
various different differences occur if
dark matter exists you should find a
peak at one of those frequencies this is
why they wanted to try and look
this anisotropic because they wanted to
look for this specific peak that would
say our models suggest that Dark Matter
exists if we find this peak now in 1892
it was too coarse to detect with that
data we actually had to wait till 2000
with the boomerang experiment which was
actually just like a high-altitude
balloon experiment to measure the Cosmic
Microwave Background to get it in enough
detail to actually detect that peak at
that given frequency and say for
definite that in our best model of the
universe dark matter has to exist at the
same time though astronomers are still
trying to determine what this dark
matter is and so if it's not gas then
the focus turned to the idea of dark
stars again of kelvins now that we know
is sort of like the end process of a
star's lifetimes things like white
dwarfs neutron stars and black holes the
thing is the number of those objects you
need to give you that mass-to-light
ratio of 10 of so is massive and so
Strom is like well we should be able to
detect those things because as soon as
they pass in front of a star from our
line of sight
they're going to act as a gravitational
lens again and then what they're going
to do is brighten that star from our
perspective and so people went in search
for these things you have the macho
collaboration which stood for massive
compact halo objects which is how they
referred to this sort of collection of
what Dark Star objects and also the eros
collaboration looking for these two and
in 1993 they both announced a detection
of one of these lensing events and so
people got really excited being like oh
it could be black holes because we've
actually detected one of these but then
over the next sort of seven eight years
they continuously monitored for more and
more of them and didn't find as many as
they expect at all and so with the
number of detections they did have they
could put an upper limit on how many of
these map shows there must be in our
Milky Way and the macho collaboration
came up with a number between eight and
fifty percent of all of the missing
matter in the Milky Way and the eros
collaboration said actually it's got an
upper limit of maximum eight percent of
all the missing matter or dark matter so
the results did differ a little bit but
it was very clear to people by the end
of the nine
used that dark matter was not made of
gas than it was not made of macho's ie
black holes neutron stars either in the
2000s the first direct proof for dark
matter was found so Clow Gonzalez and
Markovic in 2004 discovered the bullet
cluster this was two clusters of
galaxies that were in the process of
colliding again using the distortions of
background galaxies through the clusters
in two arcs they were able to get a map
of where all the matter was in this
collision of these two clusters of
galaxies they could then see where all
of the stars were in the galaxies in the
clusters as well and then also they had
x-ray observations that showed where all
the hot x-ray gas was now in a collision
of two classes of galaxies all the gas
that's in between all of the galaxies
collides in that collision heats up
incredibly hot and that's why it glows
in the x-rays but the galaxies they kind
of just fly past each other and go out
the other side so what you've got with
the bullet cluster collision is you've
got all the galaxies having to pass
through each other but leaving behind
all that hot x-ray glowing gas that
actually turned out to be the dominant
amount of mass that we can actually see
with visible light there's more gas
there in the x-rays than we actually see
in stars in the optical the thing is
when you look at where all the lens
galaxies are which reveal where the
majority of the actual mass is in terms
of the gravitational mass ie the dark
matter that you can't see actually
traces where the galaxies are and you
actually find that there's more mass
there than there is in that x-ray hot
gas that's been left behind in the
middle despite the fact that that's
brighter and that's where the most of
the visible mass actually is as this was
the first direct proof of dark matter
it definitely wasn't gas because that's
why the gas was is definitely not the
stars that
enough matter to be able to create that
amount of lensing it had to be dark
matter but it won't showed us was that
dark matter wasn't normal matter ie what
we call baryonic matter everything
around you right now from this desk to
me to this chair to my camera is made
out of baryonic matter normal matter but
dark matter can't be this normal matter
because it doesn't interact with light
it doesn't absorb it it doesn't block it
it doesn't give out light at all and
then it also doesn't behave the way that
you would expect a collection of normal
particles like in a big gas to behave
either it had to be some form of exotic
particle that we never detected before
that particle physicists can even
dreamed up before that existed neutrinos
totally would have been the favored
particle by particle physicists if for
the fact that in 1998 the
super-kamiokande experiment had shown
that their mass was tiny like far too
tiny to explain the amount of matter
that astronomers were detecting had to
be there so research is still ongoing
into Dark Matter today it's one of the
biggest unsolved problems in physics in
particular astronomers and physicists
have shown that it has to be that it has
to exist but we still haven't actually
detected any of it we don't know what
it's made of and that's a problem for
particle physicists and to try and
figure that out that either trying to
detect some through the collision of a
Dark Matter particle with a normal
matter particle in these big underground
mines or by trying to make some in these
big particle accelerators that they
built like the LHC in CERN underground
this huge big circular kilometer long
track the problem is don't know the
recipe to try and make some dark matter
so theoretical physicists are also
trying to work on what the possibilities
could be for this unknown exotic dark
whatever you want to call it material so
remember just because you haven't seen
it doesn't mean
exist okay focus focus Becky we must
talk doc mad announcing using an optical
spectra designed by Henry Ford what
Henry Ford doesn't anymore design cars
not bad for it and so people are very
interested to see if they saw any
variation in the Cosmic Microwave
Background and so the COBE satellite
team in 1920 to 1922 neutrinos would
have been the favourite particle by
particle physicists to explain dark
matter but for the fact that this super
coming Clarke super-kamiokande you
become your condo super-kamiokande cameo
canned a cameo candy was a cameo of
candy cameo candy so in the 2000s the
first direct proof for dark matter was
do you mind my back I am trying to prove
dark matter here
you